Previously, we introduced
iterative statements
in Python and focused
on for loops.
An iterative statement is code that
repeatedly executes a
set of instructions.
In this video, we'll explore
another type of iterative
statement: the while loop.
When we used for loops,
the code repeatedly executed
based on a specified sequence.
While loops still
repeatedly execute,
but this repetition is
based on a condition.
As long as the
condition is true,
the loop continues to execute.
But when it becomes false,
the while loop stops.
This while loop, for example,
sets a condition where
the variable time
must be less than
or equal to 10.
This means it will keep running
until the variable time
is greater than 10.
Similar to the for loop,
a while loop has a header.
It consists of the keyword
while, the condition,
and a colon.
The while loop starts
with the keyword while.
The keyword while signals the
beginning of a while loop
and is followed by the
condition that evaluates to
a Boolean value of
either True or False.
The condition contains
the loop variable.
This variable is used to
control the number
of loop iterations.
However, there is an
important distinction in
the variables used in
for and while loops.
With while loops,
the variable isn't
created within the
loop statement itself.
Before writing the while loop,
you need to assign the variable.
Then you'll be able to
reference it in the loop.
When the condition
containing the loop variable
evaluates to True,
the loop iterates.
If it does not,
then the loop stops.
This condition will
evaluate to True while
the variable time is less
than or equal to 10.
Finally, the loop header
ends with a colon.
Just like a for loop,
a while loop has an
indented body that
consists of the actions to
take while the loop iterates.
The intention of this code is to
print the value of a
variable that represents
the time and increase
its value by
two, until it becomes
greater than 10.
This means the first
action in this while loop
is to simply print
the current value of
the time variable.
Since while loops do not
include a sequence
to iterate through,
we have to explicitly define
how the loop variable changes
in the body of the while loop.
For example, in this while loop,
we increase the loop variable
time by two every iteration.
This is because we only want to
print the time
every two minutes,
so this while loop
prints out all
even numbers less
than or equal to 10.
Now that we know the
basics of while loops,
let's explore a
practical example.
Imagine we have a limitation on
how many devices a
user can connect to.
We can use a while loop to
print a message when the user
has reached their maximum
number of connected devices.
Let's create a while
loop for this.
Before we start our while loop,
we need to assign values
to two variables.
First, we'll set
the maximum value of
connected devices to five.
Then, we'll set our
loop variable.
We'll use i for this and
set it to a value of one.
Unlike with for loops,
with while loops, we set
this variable
outside of the loop.
Next, we'll create the
header of our while loop.
In this case, the
condition is that
the first variable is less
than the second variable.
Those variables are the loop
variable "i" and max_devices.
Since we know the value
of max_devices is five,
we can understand that
this loop will run as
long as the current value
of "i" is less than five.
Then we indicate what we
want our while loop to do.
Because this loop runs as long
as the user can still
connect to devices,
we'll first have it print
a "user can still connect to
additional devices" message.
After this, with each iteration,
we'll increment i by one.
When the loop repeats,
it will use the new
value of the i variable.
Python will exit the loop when
i is no longer less than five.
Let's also print a message
when this happens.
We stop indenting because
this next action occurs
outside of the loop.
Then we'll print "user has
reached maximum number
of connected devices."
We're ready to run this.
Because of the loop,
the first message prints
a total of four times.
The loop stops when the value
of i increments to five.
At this point, it exits
the loop and prints
the second message.
When you combine this new
understanding of for and
while loops with
what you already
know about conditional
statements and variables,
you have a lot of options
in Python. Great work!